             Invitation to the Genode Community Summer

Recently, several requests reached us at Genode Labs from people interested in
coming to Dresden for a certain period of time to work on their Genode project
while beeing able to seek our assistance in person.  To give this idea a
dedicated space, Genode Labs will hold a new event, the "Genode Community
Summer" this year.


For whom?
---------

The gathering is open for everyone of the Genode community. Each participant
should have a concrete project to pursue during the time and be able work on
this project independently most of the time. Unlike a commercial offered
workshop, there won't be any lecture or intensive coaching, but simply
co-working in an informal and friendly setting.  During the day, people of our
team would also work there so that participants can seek our assistance at any
time.

Please note that anything confidential should better be left at home!  This
way, we can accommodate people with different backgrounds at the same time
while the event bears potential for networking effects among different
community members.


Where?
------

The event will take place in the lower floor of the Genode Labs office,
Friedrichstra√üe 26, 01067 Dresden, Germany. Note, that lodging is up to each
participant individually.

[image 2019-08-13-community-summer]


When?
-----

Over two weeks from 16th to 27th of September 2019. It is possible to
participate only for a part of this time.


How to register?
----------------

Each participant must register in advance since our space is limited but the
event will be at no cost. Please register via mail to the mailing list or
martin.stein@genode-labs.com. We will hold the event only if at least 4 people
register until end of August. We will inform all participants through the
mailing list as soon as we have 4 registrations.

Your registration must contain a brief description of the project you're
planning to pursue during the gathering. Please also add whether you like to
participate for the whole two weeks, and if not, which part of that time you
will participate.



If you have further questions regarding the Genode Community Summer, please
don't hesitate to ask me directly via martin.stein@genode-labs.com or at the
mailing list users@lists.genode.org.

Hope to see you there!
