                        Genode at the FOSDEM 2023

Last week, I returned from the FOSDEM 2023 in Brussels and it was a great joy
for me after all these years to finally see a real-live FOSDEM again. Besides
belgian fries and sweetened mate tea, one could once again get a taste of
Genode at the conference. This year, the OS framework received 3 presentation
in two different tracks.

The presentation that maybe was the biggest surprise for me was "Using Genode
as an enabler for research on modern operating systems" by Michael Müller from
the University Osnabrück. As most time of the year I'm deep down some technical
innards of Genode in our office in Dresden, it's a real pleasure for me to see
someone from the "outer world" using Genode for his day-to-day work and being
so motivated by it that he travels to Brussels and holds a talk about it. You
can access the recording of the talk here:

https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/genode/

The most impressive and promising Genode talk for me was "Can Genode on the
PinePhone question the notion of a smartphone?" by Norman Feske. He
demonstrates the current state of one of the main directions at Genode Labs
currently: conquering the smartphone world with fresh concepts. He also carried
a full box of printed Genode "Foundations" and "Platforms" books. After the
presentation they disappeared in no time, leaving us with an astonished smile.
You can watch the video online:

https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/genode_on_the_pinephone/

The presentation I learned the most from myself was "Device driver gardening"
by Stefan Kalkowski. He developed the modernized and much faster approach for
porting Linux device drivers to Genode. In the talk he even gives a short
demonstration of how it works. The video is available here:

https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/ddtransplant/

I hope you enjoy the talks as much as I have.
See you soon!
